Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you. Friends, we come to the sixth Sunday of Easter, so we're toward the end of the Easter season. And this means the readings start talking about Jesus.
the Holy Spirit.
The church is readying us for the great feast of Pentecost, the coming of the Spirit. And there's a really interesting, I think, juxtaposition between the gospel and the first
The first readings. I want to look at that. But before I finish this homily, I want to glance, too, at the second reading from the book of Revelation. They're related to each other, I think, in a really interesting way. Okay.
Thank you.
So we're back at the...
A high priestly prayer, Jesus, the night before he dies, talking to his disciples.
He says, whoever loves me will keep my word. My father will love them and we will come and make our dwelling in him. It's one of the great truths of Christianity, the indwelling of the truth.
I'm the Trinitarian person. It's beautiful. But I want to focus on what comes next.
He says, he says,
I've told you this while I'm with you.
But the advocate,
The Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name,
I will teach you everything and remind you of what I told you.
Karl Barth, the great Protestant theologian from the last century.
It said, the claim that God has spoken is,
implies the Trinity
And what he meant was, if you say God has spoken, which is a basic biblical intuition,
That means there must be in God a speaker, right?
We call him the father.
There must be a word spoken. We call that the sun.
And, Bart says, there must be an interpreter of the word. Why? Because the divine word, that's too much for our little minds to handle.
So we need not a human interpreter. He's not going to help us with that. Right.
We need a divine interpreter of the divine word. Well, see, that's what's going on here.
5. I've told you all this because the Father has spoken his word in Jesus. 6.
"'But the Father and I are going to send,' he said,
An advocate, it says in English.
The Greek is parakletos.
Colleen means to call. Parra means in this context over. It means to call someone over. The idea here is like a...
A lawyer.
Or someone that's going to help you during a trial. You call them over to give you advice.
That's why paracletos becomes advocatus.
Focaccia is mean called. Odd means to. Okay, come on over and help me. Hence, advocate.
The Holy Spirit, and what will he do? He will teach you everything. Now, this is a really important point.
We can't think about divine revelation as
This football that was just delivered
And then it's passed on
It's unchanged from one person to another.
That's way too undynamic an understanding of this process.
So, and my go-to person here is,
It's John Henry Newman.
When Newman talked about the development of doctrine, now please, I forbid you to read that in a relativistic way.
Newman said ideas don't exist statically on the page.
But rather they exist, he said, in the play of lively minds. Yeah.
I have an idea.
I consider it. I turn it over. I look at it from different angles. Okay.
I muse, I wonder.
And then you come along and I'll toss the idea to you and tell you what I think about it.
Now you take it in and you turn it over and muse and look at different aspects and angles and then we pass on to somebody else and we have a lively conversation about the idea
The idea. Now, what's happening is in that process, right?
That idea is growing. It's developing. It's unfolding. Yeah.
Not becoming something different.
But becoming in the process more fully
Itself
Now, a lot of other examples come to mind here, the idea it happens, but the idea
The way Newman says a river.
Unfolds
It's beginning as a tiny source.
But then across space and time, it broadens, it deepens, and it takes tributaries in and becomes a mighty river.
Think of the source of a river like the Mississippi and then the mouth of that river and how different they are.
Because the Mississippi, you might say, has become more itself. In a similar way, a little acorn, right?
It breaks open, unfolds, takes in nutrients and mixes with the environment and grows and develops and sends off branches and twigs and leaves and everything.
And everything else. It's changing. Listen now.
To become more fully itself.
That's the paradox.
Living things
change in order to remain the same.
I think, again, like if a living thing has died, that means it stopped changing. Well, in very short order, it's no longer itself changing.
That tree has died. Well, it stops being the tree. It turns into something else. Right.
An animal has died.
It's not an animal. Before you know it, it's just part of the environment again. Yeah.
Living things are marked by...
Change and development
So Newman's famous line,
To live is to change.
To be perfect is to have changed often.
Again, I forbid you to read that as some sort of 1960s era relativism. That's not what it means.
Hey, man, things are always changing. It means changing to remain themselves, right?
Unfolding, becoming more authentically themselves.
That's why Chesterton, in a great image, always comes back to my mind here. He says if there's this perfectly white image,
100% offense post. And your job is...
Is to keep it the way it is.
What do you have to do? Well, you have to paint it all the time.
Right? You just leave it alone. Don't touch it. It's perfect the way it is. Don't touch it. Well, it'll be black before you know it.
No, you've got to paint that thing over and over and over again to keep it what it is, right?
Well, something similar here.
Ideas have to...
Develop
In order to remain
Themselves
now.
The great revelation given to us in Jesus. Yes, he's the divine Logos. In the beginning was the Word. The Word was with God. The Word was God. And this Word becomes flesh.
12, 12, 12, 12, 12, 12, 12, 13. So the first verse says, And the first verse says,
But he spoke that word into the
Human minds,
That take it in.
And mull it over and muse about it and wonder about it and look at it from different angles.
And discuss it.
And then toss it to other people who do the same.
Now, now, now.
Watch this process unfolding across space.
It's the idea now goes out to the wider world, different cities and different places, now extended across time.
So one theologian
I was thinking about Jesus saying,
Passes his thoughts on to the next generation.
who passed it on to another generation and to another, to another, until finally they're received by someone that that first person had no contact with.
But yet the idea has continued to grow.
Develop and unfold.
okay.
If that's true,
What we need is an interpreter of the word.
You can't just say, oh, yeah, I got it. I received the logos. I got it.
You know, ideas are...
It's unfolding appropriately to remain themselves.
And so we require, indeed,
The odd volcatos, the paracletos.
The advocate, the Holy Spirit,
who is going to guide the church.
Into all truth again.
He'll teach you
Everything. Everything.
It's not just given. It's now given.
Unfolding over space and time.
All right.
With all that in mind, that's the gospel. Look at this extraordinary passage we have. It's from the Acts of the Apostles, that marvelous text telling us about the earliest days of the church.
Church.
what they're up to.
Well, what's being described here is a...
The first
Council.
or synod, if you want, in the church.
It's the Council of Jerusalem.
2023. Very early on, what was the issue? It was a very important one. Might not strike us that way, but very important because, you know,
Christianity emerged up out of classical Judaism. First Christians are all Jews, Jesus is a Jew, and out of Judaism emerges Christianity.
Christianity.
So the question became, all right,
To what degree do we have to remain Jewish?
And to one degree, it's just a whole brand new thing. Yeah.
So what's the relationship between our Judaism and this Jewish community?
Jesus movement. Okay. You can see it reflected clearly in the letters of Paul. Paul's preaching a doctrine of justification by grace through faith. And not through
Not to the law. Well, I mean, right away, it's going to cause a problem for these Jewish Christians. Right.
Well what do you mean the law of the law is everything isn't it
Well,
A problem.
They bring people together including Paul himself and Barnabas and they
Talk it out.
What do they do? Well, they've received these ideas from Jesus. They've received ideas.
The revelation
And now they got this question. And so they mean lose and they mull it over and they think and they wonder and they discuss and they argue, tossing the idea back and forth.
We'll be right back.
They come to a resolution. And the resolution is indeed the one that we see reflected in Paul.
Of course, Christianity remains a deeply Jewish movement. You can't understand Christianity without Judaism. At the same time, they realized that
There's something so new in Jesus that we're not tied to the old dietary and
Judicial precepts of the law.
okay.
They made a distinction, a determination.
And then there's this marvelous line.
Where they say, listen, at the end of this whole process,
It is the decision
of the Holy Spirit
And of us
Not to place on you any burden beyond these necessities and so on.
So they announced their resolution.
But I love that little line. It appeared correct to...
In other words, to this community, the Holy Spirit is the only one who can do it.
Guided by the odd volcanoes.
But guided by the advocate, we've been led into a deeper truth. Right.
All right, everybody, within a few decades here of the dying and rising of Jesus, we have this first counsel.
There have been 20 councils.
100, including the Second Vatican Council, which happened in my own lifetime. 100,
About once a century, on average, the church faces a crisis. Yeah.
As it's thinking through what it believes and what it practices
Arguing with itself, tossing ideas back and forth.
Things developing and unfolding over time and space. Uh-huh.
At certain crisis points,
The church has to come together as a synod or a council.
Right. At the end of which they say that
8. Some version of this. 9.
It's appeared good to the Holy Spirit.
And to us.
Everybody, it's the beauty of church history. That's why we study church history, not just as an antiquarian discipline. We study it
As
A study of the Holy Spirit.
Of what has the Holy Spirit been doing guiding the church into all truth?
Now, I promised a glance as I end at the second reading.
1966, which is from the book of Revelation. We're right toward the
And we see here the culmination of biblical revelation. It's the arrival of the new Jerusalem.
And we get that marvelous description. Yeah.
"'He showed me the holy city, "'coming down out of heaven from God, "'it gleamed with the splendor of God. "'Its radiance was like that of precious stone, "'like jasper.
As for clear as crystal, had a massive high wall, the 12 gates of pearl. Here's this beautiful, beautiful thing.
Complete, complete, complete, complete.
Finished
City.
What does that represent?
It represents the fullness of
Life in Christ.
The end.
Of all development.
where the idea of the Incarnation now has reached its complete
Perfection.
Here's the point.
We're not there yet. We're not there yet. We're not there yet.
That's at the culmination of the age at the end of time.
We live now in the era of the church.
The great revelation given to us by Jesus is now
Developing and unfolding like a river
Like a tree.
Like a plant, like ideas in the play of lively minds. And it's happening. I know it can be kind of a messy process.
But it's happening we trust.
Under the guidance of the advocate.
under the guidance of the Holy Spirit.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire.org.